# Code Book
Getting-and-Cleaning-Data Course Project

This code book refers to the data set tidy_data.txt that is part of this repository. Pls refer to the README.md file for an 
overview of the project and the origin of the source data set. 

The contents of this code book are as follows
+ STRUCTURE OF THE OUTPUT DATA (tidy_data.txt)
+ VARIABLES OF OUTPUT DATA (tidy_data.txt)
    + Identifiers
    + Time Measurements
    + Frequency Measurements
+ PROCEDURES APPLIED TO THE SOURCE DATA

# STRUCTURE OF THE OUTPUT DATA

The output data that is generated by the R Code is contained in tidy_data.txt. 
tidy_data.txt is a text file and contains space-separated values.

The names of the variables are contained in the first row of the data set. You can refer to them in the succeeding chapter on variables.
All further rows in the data set contain the observations/values that relate to those variables.

Within each row, for a given subject and activity, you will find 79 averaged signal measurements that represent variables.

# VARIABLES OF THE OUTPUT DATA

## Identifiers

subject:  Subject identifier, integer, ranges from 1 to 30.

activity: Activity identifier, string with 6 possible values:

            + WALKING: subject was walking                          (initial value='1')
            + WALKING_UPSTAIRS: subject was walking upstairs        (initial value='2')
            + WALKING_DOWNSTAIRS: subject was walking downstairs    (initial value='3')
            + SITTING: subject was sitting                          (initial value='4')
            + STANDING: subject was standing                        (initial value='5')
            + LAYING: subject was laying                            (initial value='6')

Average of measurements:

All measurements are floating-point values, normalised and bounded within [-1,1].
Prior to normalisation, acceleration measurements (variables containing Accelerometer) were made in g's (9.81 m.s⁻²) 
and gyroscope measurements (variables containing Gyroscope) were made in radians per second (rad.s⁻¹).

Magnitudes of three-dimensional signals (variables containing Magnitude) were calculated using the Euclidean norm.

The measurements are classified in two domains:

            + Time-domain signals (variables prefixed by timeDomain)
              resulting from the capture of accelerometer and gyroscope raw signals.
            
            + Frequency-domain signals (variables prefixed by frequencyDomain), 
              resulting from the application of a Fast Fourier Transform (FFT) to some of the time-domain signals.

## Time Measurements

Avg. time of body acceleration in the X, Y and Z directions:

            + timeBodyAccelerometerMeanX
            + timeBodyAccelerometerMeanY
            + timeBodyAccelerometerMeanZ

Std. deviation of the time of body acceleration in the X, Y and Z directions:

            + timeBodyAccelerometerStandardDeviationX
            + timeBodyAccelerometerStandardDeviationY
            + timeBodyAccelerometerStandardDeviationZ

Avg. time of gravity acceleration in the X, Y and Z directions:

            + timeGravityAccelerometerMeanX
            + timeGravityAccelerometerMeanY
            + timeGravityAccelerometerMeanZ

Std. deviation of time of gravity acceleration in the X, Y and Z directions:

            + timeGravityAccelerometerStandardDeviationX
            + timeGravityAccelerometerStandardDeviationY
            + timeGravityAccelerometerStandardDeviationZ

Avg. body acceleration jerk (derivation of the acceleration in time) in the X, Y and Z directions:

            + timeBodyAccelerometerJerkMeanX
            + timeBodyAccelerometerJerkMeanY
            + timeBodyAccelerometerJerkMeanZ

Std. deviation of body acceleration jerk (derivation of the acceleration in time) in the X, Y and Z directions:

            + timeBodyAccelerometerJerkStandardDeviationX
            + timeBodyAccelerometerJerkStandardDeviationY
            + timeBodyAccelerometerJerkStandardDeviationZ

Avg. body angular velocity in the X, Y and Z directions:

            + timeBodyGyroscopeMeanX
            + timeBodyGyroscopeMeanY
            + timeBodyGyroscopeMeanZ

Std. deviation of body angular velocity in the X, Y and Z directions:

            + timeBodyGyroscopeStandardDeviationX
            + timeBodyGyroscopeStandardDeviationY
            + timeBodyGyroscopeStandardDeviationZ

Avg. body angular velocity jerk (derivation of the angular velocity in time) in the X, Y and Z directions:

            + timeBodyGyroscopeJerkMeanX
            + timeBodyGyroscopeJerkMeanY
            + timeBodyGyroscopeJerkMeanZ

Std. deviation of body angular velocity jerk (derivation of the angular velocity in time) in the X, Y and Z directions:

            + timeBodyGyroscopeJerkStandardDeviationX
            + timeBodyGyroscopeJerkStandardDeviationY
            + timeBodyGyroscopeJerkStandardDeviationZ

Avg. & std. deviation of magnitude of body acceleration:

            + timeBodyAccelerometerMagnitudeMean
            + timeBodyAccelerometerMagnitudeStandardDeviation

Avg. & std. deviation of magnitude of gravity acceleration:

            + timeGravityAccelerometerMagnitudeMean
            + timeGravityAccelerometerMagnitudeStandardDeviation

Avg. & std. deviation of magnitude of body acceleration jerk (derivation of the acceleration in time):

            + timeBodyAccelerometerJerkMagnitudeMean
            + timeBodyAccelerometerJerkMagnitudeStandardDeviation

Avg. & std. deviation of magnitude of body angular velocity:

            + timeBodyGyroscopeMagnitudeMean
            + timeBodyGyroscopeMagnitudeStandardDeviation

Avg. & std. deviation of magnitude of body angular velocity jerk (derivation of the angular velocity in time):

            + timeBodyGyroscopeJerkMagnitudeMean
            + timeBodyGyroscopeJerkMagnitudeStandardDeviation

## Frequency Measurements

Avg. frequency of body acceleration in the X, Y and Z directions:

            + frequencyBodyAccelerometerMeanX
            + frequencyBodyAccelerometerMeanY
            + frequencyBodyAccelerometerMeanZ

Std. deviation of frequency of body acceleration in the X, Y and Z directions:

            + frequencyBodyAccelerometerStandardDeviationX
            + frequencyBodyAccelerometerStandardDeviationY
            + frequencyBodyAccelerometerStandardDeviationZ

Weighted avg. of frequency components of body acceleration in the X, Y and Z directions:

            + frequencyBodyAccelerometerMeanFrequencyX
            + frequencyBodyAccelerometerMeanFrequencyY
            + frequencyBodyAccelerometerMeanFrequencyZ

Avg. frequency of body acceleration jerk (derivation of the acceleration in time) in the X, Y and Z directions:

            + frequencyBodyAccelerometerJerkMeanX
            + frequencyBodyAccelerometerJerkMeanY
            + frequencyBodyAccelerometerJerkMeanZ

Std. deviation of the frequency of body acceleration jerk (derivation of the acceleration in time) in the X, Y and Z directions:

            + frequencyBodyAccelerometerJerkStandardDeviationX
            + frequencyBodyAccelerometerJerkStandardDeviationY
            + frequencyBodyAccelerometerJerkStandardDeviationZ

Weighted avg. of the frequency components of body acceleration jerk (derivation of the acceleration in time) in the X, Y and Z directions:

            + frequencyBodyAccelerometerJerkMeanFrequencyX
            + frequencyBodyAccelerometerJerkMeanFrequencyY
            + frequencyBodyAccelerometerJerkMeanFrequencyZ

Avg. frequency-domain body angular velocity in the X, Y and Z directions:

            + frequencyBodyGyroscopeMeanX
            + frequencyBodyGyroscopeMeanY
            + frequencyBodyGyroscopeMeanZ

Std. deviation of the frequency of body angular velocity in the X, Y and Z directions:

            + frequencyBodyGyroscopeStandardDeviationX
            + frequencyBodyGyroscopeStandardDeviationY
            + frequencyBodyGyroscopeStandardDeviationZ

Weighted avg. of the frequency components of body angular velocity in the X, Y and Z directions:

            + frequencyBodyGyroscopeMeanFrequencyX
            + frequencyBodyGyroscopeMeanFrequencyY
            + frequencyBodyGyroscopeMeanFrequencyZ

Avg., std. deviation, and weighted avg. of the frequency components of magnitude of body acceleration:

            + frequencyBodyAccelerometerMagnitudeMean
            + frequencyBodyAccelerometerMagnitudeStandardDeviation
            + frequencyBodyAccelerometerMagnitudeMeanFrequency

Avg., std. deviation, and weighted avg. of the frequency components of magnitude of body acceleration jerk (derivation of the acceleration in time):

            + frequencyBodyAccelerometerJerkMagnitudeMean
            + frequencyBodyAccelerometerJerkMagnitudeStandardDeviation
            + frequencyBodyAccelerometerJerkMagnitudeMeanFrequency

Avg., std. deviation, and weighted avg. of the frequency components of magnitude of body angular velocity:

            + frequencyBodyGyroscopeMagnitudeMean
            + frequencyBodyGyroscopeMagnitudeStandardDeviation
            + frequencyBodyGyroscopeMagnitudeMeanFrequency

Avg., std. deviation, and weighted avg. of the frequency components of magnitude of body angular velocity jerk (derivation of the angular velocity in time):

            + frequencyBodyGyroscopeJerkMagnitudeMean
            + frequencyBodyGyroscopeJerkMagnitudeStandardDeviation
            + frequencyBodyGyroscopeJerkMagnitudeMeanFrequency

# PROCEDURES APPLIED TO THE SOURCE DATA

The zip file containing the original source data is located at:
https://d396qusza40orc.cloudfront.net/getdata%2Fprojectfiles%2FUCI%20HAR%20Dataset.zip.

The following procedures have been applied to the original source data:
+ two data sets, training data set and test data set are merged into one data set.
+ Measurements on the mean and standard deviation (i.e. signals containing the strings mean and std) were extracted
  for each measurement, and the others were discarded.
+ The activity identifiers (originally coded as integers between 1 and 6) were replaced with descriptive 
  activity names (see Identifiers section).
+ The variable names were replaced with descriptive variable names 
  (e.g. tBodyAcc-mean()-X was expanded to timeBodyAccelerometerMeanX), using the following set of rules:
      + Special characters (i.e. (, ), and -) were removed
      + The initial f and t were expanded to frequency and time respectively.
      + Acc, Gyro, Mag, Freq, mean, and std were replaced with Accelerometer, Gyroscope, Magnitude, Frequency, Mean, and 
        StandardDeviation respectively.
        
From the data set in step 4, the final data set was created with the average of each variable for each activity and each subject.
The procedures as outlined were generated by the run_analysis.R R script.
